Contrary to popular belief, muscle
damage is not how you grow a muscle.
Muscle damage is damage. The more you
damage a muscle while you're working
out, the less you will grow. So, it is
inversely related. So, like if you're
chasing soreness, man, you're really
missing the boat.
[Music]
Hi, my name is John Jish. I am a doctor
of biomedical engineering which gives me
a unique perspective on a lot of
different things human physiology
related. Today I'm going to talk about
the different ways a muscle grows and
understanding this can really help guide
your training. So I'm going to start off
with the more standard ways cuz there's
ways that we understand very well which
is cycloplasmic and myofbral. You won't
be tested on this so don't worry but
it's important to remember the
differences between these two. So this
you gota you're gonna learn something
here. These are the two main ways
cycloplasmic myophibbral. Then we have a
myophibbral packing which is slightly
different than the first two. And then
we also have hyperplasia which is the
one we know about the least but we know
what happens. So,
let me go down the list and I'm going to
talk about how each of these things
happens. And uh you're probably with
your training, if you're training
successfully and growing muscle, you are
getting all of these different types.
But knowing where the different types of
growth comes from is going to make you
better at stimulating all of these types
because they're all very specific. And
you don't want sort of a shotgun
approach where you're just doing some
stuff and hoping that other stuff like
these different types of muscular growth
are just happening. So number one
myofbral growth. So this is the growth
of the bundles of actin and meiosin
which look like this. They come together
to create the contraction. So the actin
and meiosin are where the basically
tension comes from. So all stimulus of
all types of muscle growth comes from
relevant mechanical tension through the
muscle cell/fiber/myophibbral
if you want to get down to the most
basic levels. So when you create
mechanical tension you are lifting
something. So my bicep as I contract my
bicep and let's imagine I had a weight
here it would become heavy you know in
in v various positions like depending on
the biomechanics of the exercise heavier
or lighter in certain positions and it's
going to induce a level of fatigue at
some point. So
contrary to popular belief muscle damage
is not how you grow a muscle. Muscle
damage is damage. In fact, the more you
damage a muscle while you're working
out, the less you will grow. So, it is
inversely related. So, like if you're
chasing soreness, man, you're really
missing the boat. You don't want to
chase soreness. Also, a lot of people
say, "Oh, I really feel the lactic
acid." No, you don't. You don't feel
lactic acid. lactic acid and the
associated metabolites that pull in the
muscle after training, you want to leave
them there so they can initiate the
growth process. And it doesn't
necessarily mean you need to be sore. So
the vast majority of the muscle I have
gained was through variable resistance,
which started basically right around my
40th birthday. It was like 2 days after
my 40th birthday. I am 48 now. So, I was
like my 40th birthday, I was like an
untrained guy. I looked like just not
like if I made some sort of fitness
presentation, you would look at me and
be like, "How the hell does this guy
know anything? He's not strong." And I
wasn't. I looked spectacularly average.
So, my fitness journey began then when I
started training with variable
resistance. I made the prototype of the
first X3 and finally got it back from
the machine shop. I actually launched
the product about a year and a half
later. When looking at myophibro growth,
this is the most sensitive to mechanical
tension on a momentby-moment basis. When
going to fatigue and having this, this
is an important term, too, velocity
loss. Let's say I'm training with a
certain cadence. I like a little bit
slower cadence than a lot of people
because the slower you go, the more
muscle tissue you actually get involved
in the movement. Fast reps are great
from a neurological perspective. I'll
talk about that on another day. But if
you're trying to grow muscle, nice,
slow, and controlled. And as soon as
that rate that you or that cadence that
you're using starts to slow down despite
your greatest efforts, that doesn't mean
you slow down. That means the weight
slows down despite you trying to keep it
at the same speed. That's velocity loss
because of mechanical tension and
exhaustion. So that's really where the
myophibbral growth is going to be
happening when that velocity loss
happens. And with variable resistance,
which is the way I train, you get a lot
more force through the muscle in the
stronger range of motion. So when I'm
here, you know, you're you're
seven times more powerful as I
demonstrated with the medical device
that I invented many years ago compared
to the NAS database which is the largest
fitness database in the world. Uh when
comparing the two data sets, you are so
much stronger here than you are here.
Once you know that, you can train
accordingly and that's variable
resistance. So, first at the beginning
of fatigue, the first fatigue point.
Now, keep in mind when you're lifting
regular weights, you only have one
fatigue point. When you're using
variable resistance, you have many with
a fresh muscle, which is part of the
reason why variable resistance is so
powerful. So, I'm going through a range
of motion and when I go to fatigue at
the top, and if it's a chest press,
let's say it's 550 lbs, I can't get to
550 anymore because I'm beginning to
exhaust. So, I've had one failure point.
Now I shorten the repetitions. What that
first fatigue point is going to do is
really show the central nervous system
that many of the myophibbrals couldn't
hang. They were inable unable to
continue that rate of work and that
level of force mechanical tension
remember very important. So when that
happens, that first fatigue point in
variable resistance is going to be a
more myophibbral type stimulus. So
density of muscle. And now if you have
inordinate amounts of this and
powerlifting can kind of do this. Now
I'll give you just a little teaser for
the end. A larger muscle is a stronger
muscle. Period. And we'll talk about the
science of that at the end of this. But
if you're focused on
lower repetitions,
very high amounts of weight, training
more like a powerlter, you're probably
going to get more of the myophibbral
growth in the beginning.
And you'll also have myophibbral
packing, which is sometimes considered a
different way to grow muscle, but it
really just means that your myophibbrals
are getting thicker and thicker. more
actin and meiosin are coming together to
make more actuators inside of the cell.
The the myophibbral becomes thicker and
then there's a smaller cross-section
represented by cycloplasm. A greater
cross-section
by and cycloplasm is really just a fluid
in the cells that is there to store ATP,
glycogen and creatine phosphate. Those
are the three fuels that you use while
you contract the muscle. So
now we can shift over to what is
sarcoplasmic
hypertrophy. So this is different.
The way cycloplasmic hypertrophy works
is instead of like myophibbrals being
based on the velocity loss, the fatigue
of the actual myophibbrals, those
actiniosin
cycloplasmic hypertrophy comes from the
exhaustion of the fuels that are held
within the cell. So the ATP, the
glycogen, the creatine, phosphate, when
those start to go away, well that's
where you get the pump from. So guys who
are always chasing the pump, they're
focused on cycloplasmic a little more.
And again, you get all types of muscle
growth when you're doing this. You can
bias it one way or the other, but
eventually it evens out and a larger
muscle is a stronger muscle. I'll get to
that at the end. So, and I'm just
repeating that a second time because
it's very important that you understand
that you can't just get one without the
other, but you can be focused on one or
the other at certain times. So,
cycloplasmic hypertrophy is almost the
endurance mechanism of the muscle. And I
don't mean endurance from like, you
know, distance running perspective. I
mean endurance as in as you're doing
repetitions,
what's fatiguing first? Is it the actual
myophibbrals that are being called out
as in like they're saying to the central
nervous system, we cannot create the
same amount of force. So, we're going to
stop creating that same amount of force
even though we can go through with the
movement. I mean like even when you're
exhausted if I train my biceps I can
still do that and contract them but are
they capable of creating the same amount
of mechanical tension? No, because I've
gone to momentary muscular failure and
then in the case of variable resistance
multiple points of mechanical tension.
So when I'm doing repetitions with in a
chest press at some point I start to
fatigue. So that first maybe one or two
fatigue points is more of a myophibbral
type stimulus. But we always go very
high reps with variable resistance for a
couple reasons. One of them is to enact
sarcoplasmic hypertrophy towards the end
while we're fatiguing the stretched
range of motion. This is part of the
reason the stretched range of motion is
very anabolic. You don't want to bypass
the the low point. In fact, there's
there's whole exercises in in various
programmings like low squats, low
deadlifts, just focusing on that stretch
range of motion. These are very
anabolic. And here's why. As I'm going
to fatigue here, it's not so much the
momentary mechanical tension that's the
problem. It's just continuing to do
repetitions
with even a low amount of weight.
Because when I go to fatigue towards the
bottom of a chest press, I might only be
dealing with 150 or 200 lb, which is
really light for me, but I've exhausted
all ranges of motion to that point. I
can barely handle that 200 lb. So, what
is really happening is I'm burning
through all the muscle glycogen, all the
creatine phosphate, all the ATP. ATP
actually comes first. So, wiping that
muscle out of all of these fuels, what
does that do? That's a call for the
central nervous system. All right, we
need massive blood flow here. We need
all the metabolites and we need to store
more fuel. Only way you communicate with
your central nervous system is
environment. You are creating an
environment where first the mechanical
tension is too much in the strongest
range. Then you're going higher
repetitions. So your muscle cannot
endure these continued contractions
while more mechanical tension, fatigue,
and velocity loss is happening towards
the bottom in these lengthened partials.
That's what they're called. I I kind of
call it diminishing range just for like
the X3 protocol, but they're lengthened
partials. And so you basically keep
going until you can't move anymore. Both
types of growth happen in every variable
resistance set. and to a very high
degree probably the highest degree that
your body is capable of growing muscle.
So we got myophibbral myophibbral
packing cycloplasmic growth now is
hyperplasia. Now hyperplasia
happens for a number of reasons.
It's seen very easily when looking
through a microscope at a at an embryo.
So when you know conception happens and
the child is growing inside of the
mother's womb, we can see cells muscle
cells splitting.
Now we also know based on analysis of
strength athletes that clearly this is
happening during people's lifetimes,
but we don't exactly know when or how to
measure it. It seems sort of strange. A
lot of scientists don't want to talk
about what science doesn't know, but
this is something that science is not
really an expert on yet. However, we do
know from some aven studies, bird
studies, that if you stretch a muscle,
most specifically when you stretch a
muscle after it has a lot of blood in it
because you're doing you're putting
stress on the length and the width by
just increasing the blood flow into the
muscle. At that point when you stretch,
now I'm not talking about the stretched
range of motion during an exercise. I'm
talking about after you're done, you
have a pump, which means the casing of
the muscle, what's called the muscle
fasia is highly stressed. And then you
do high mechanical tension stretching at
the end of that. you can at least what
we've seen in animal models elicit
the splitting of cells, you know,
ultimately increasing the number of
muscle cells that you have. Very
difficult to measure in humans. We don't
know if we're doing it. The way a lot of
these birds were stretched was for like
an hour at a time. I don't know if the
sort of 25 seconds or 30 seconds of
stretching after a hard set is really
going to elicit that. But that is what I
have people do after their sets that
especially their sets that went to
higher levels of repetition so they have
more blood flow in the muscle stressing
the casing of the muscle to muscle fasia
and then stretching at the end of it
after the workout is over. And all of
the again, all of these things happen
and it's almost unavoidable
to a degree. And here's how I know that.
Because last year an absolutely
spectacular study was published which
demonstrated that you can take an MRI of
pectoral muscles and with statistical
significance which is just a fancy way
of saying 95% of the time we'd be
accurate. You can determine somebody's
one rep maximum bench press by doing an
MRI on their pecs. This is so
ridiculously profound, mostly because
a bench press involves two whole ass
other muscles.
And despite the variance that would be
created, now keep in mind, you can have
a certain type of pectoral that might
have a certain level of power associated
with it, but they're not even measuring
what the tricep or the deltoid can do.
And those are two other muscles that are
involved in that movement. So even with
the inability to account for that
variation,
they can determine what your chest press
is just looking at your pectoral. And
that is so ridiculously powerful. And
the likelihood of that actually even
ever being useful data was like
mind-blowing when this thing came out.
And I and I think a lot of people
realize that it was an important
finding, but it's probably one of the
most important findings out there
because now we know if you're chasing
strength or if you're chasing muscle
size, it's the same subject. And
strength is a lot easier to measure and
not nearly as subjective because you can
look at yourself in the mirror and go, I
think I'm getting smaller and you're
just being dysmorphic. You're just nuts.
But your strength, that's a hard number.
And you now know that by chasing
strength, you are going to be bigger.
That's just full stop as a result of
this study, which I think is absolutely
magical. So important, such an
advancement of science and it really
simplifies what we need to look for. So,
you are chasing strengths from this
moment forward because that's the
easiest way to tell if you're growing or
not. Um, please answer in the comments
if you have any questions about this or
if you want any details on the study and
if there's a lot of great questions,
I'll make another video and get more
specific. But these are the types of
muscle growth that are going on while
you're training. And
now you know that no matter what you're
chasing, if you think you're chasing
muscle size, if you think you're chasing
strength, really it just comes down to
strength and you're going to get
absolutely everything you want. I just
made your life a lot easier. Make sure
to subscribe so I can do this all the
time for you. Thanks. If this video
helped you, I want you to subscribe and
follow. I'm going to put out videos on a
regular basis. I think they're going to
help a whole lot of people, especially
if you're one of those people that
doesn't just instantly grow from lifting
regular weights. We've got the answer
for you.